{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.17763}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 Anomaly Detection in Time Series\par
12 mins read\par
Author Aayush Bajaj\par
Updated May 13th, 2022\par
Time series are everywhere! In user behavior on a website, or stock prices of a Fortune 500 company, or any other time-related example. Time series data is evident in every industry in some shape or form. \par
\par
Naturally, it\rquote s also one of the most researched types of data. As a rule of thumb, you could say time series is a type of data that\rquote s sampled based on some kind of time-related dimension like years, months, or seconds.\par
\par
Time series are observations that have been recorded in an orderly fashion and which are correlated in time.\par
\par
While analyzing time series data, we have to make sure of the outliers, much as we do in static data. If you\rquote ve worked with data in any capacity, you know how much pain outliers cause for an analyst. These outliers are called \ldblquote anomalies\rdblquote  in time series jargon.\par
\par
READ ALSO\par
Time Series Prediction: How Is It Different From Other Machine Learning?\par
\par
What are anomalies/outliers and types of anomalies in time-series data?\par
From a traditional point of view, an outlier/anomaly is:\par
\par
\ldblquote An observation which deviates so much from other observations as to arouse suspicions that it was generated by a different mechanism.\rdblquote\par
\par
Therefore, you can think of outliers as observations that don\rquote t follow the expected behavior.\par
\par
Time series outliers\par
As the figure above shows, outliers in time series can have two different meanings.  The semantic distinction between them is mainly based on your interest as the analyst, or the particular scenario. \par
\par
These observations have been related to noise, erroneous or unwanted data, which by itself isn\rquote t interesting to the analyst. In these cases, outliers should be deleted or corrected to improve data quality, and generate a cleaner dataset that can be used by other data mining algorithms. For example, sensor transmission errors are eliminated to obtain more accurate predictions, because the main goal is to make predictions. \par
\par
Nevertheless, in recent years \f1\endash  especially in the area of time series data \endash  many researchers have aimed to detect and analyze unusual, but interesting phenomena. Fraud detection is a good example \endash  the main objective is to detect and analyze the outlier itself. These observations are often referred to as anomalies.\par
\par
The anomaly detection problem for time series is usually formulated as identifying outlier data points relative to some norm or usual signal. Take a look at some outlier types:\par
\par
Time series outliers types\par
Let\rquote s break this down one by one:\par
\par
Point outlier\par
A point outlier is a datum that behaves unusually in a specific time instance when compared either to the other values in the time series (global outlier), or to its neighboring points (local outlier). \par
\par
Example: are you aware of the Gamestop frenzy? A slew of young retail investors bought GME stock to get back at big hedge funds, driving the stock price way up. That sudden, short-lived spike that occurred due to an unlikely event is an additive (point) outlier. The unexpected growth of a time-based value in a short period (looks like a sudden spike) comes under additive outliers.\par
\par
Time series point outlier\par
Source: Google\par
Point outliers can be univariate or multivariate, depending on whether they affect one or more time-dependent variables, respectively. \par
\par
Fig. 1a contains two univariate point outliers, O1 and O2, whereas the multivariate time series is composed of three variables in Fig. 3b, and has both univariate (O3) and multivariate (O1 and O2) point outliers.\par
\par
Point outliers in time series\par
\par
Fig: 1\u8202?\emdash\u8202?Point outliers in time series data. | Source\par
We will take a deeper look at Univariate Point Outliers in the Anomaly Detection section.\par
\par
Subsequence outlier\par
This means consecutive points in time whose joint behavior is unusual, although each observation individually is not necessarily a point outlier. Subsequence outliers can also be global or local, and can affect one (univariate subsequence outlier) or more (multivariate subsequence outlier) time-dependent variables. \par
\par
Fig. 2 provides an example of univariate (O1 and O2 in Fig. 2a, and O3 in Fig. 2b) and multivariate (O1 and O2 in Fig. 2b) subsequence outliers. Note that the latter does not necessarily affect all the variables (e.g., O2 in Fig. 2b).\par
\par
\u8202?Subsequence outliers in time series \par
Fig: 2\u8202?\emdash\u8202?Subsequence outliers in time series data. | Source\par
Anomaly detection techniques in time series data\par
There are few techniques that analysts can employ to identify different anomalies in data. It starts with a basic statistical decomposition and can work up to autoencoders. Let\rquote s start with the basic one, and understand how and why it\rquote s useful.\par
\par
NOTE\par
\f2\u-10179?\u-9020?\f0  Here you can find the notebook and the data used in the article\par
\par
STL decomposition\par
STL stands for seasonal-trend decomposition procedure based on LOESS. This technique gives you the ability to split your time series signal into three parts: seasonal, trend, and residue.\par
\par
It works for seasonal time-series, which is also the most popular type of time series data. To generate an STL-decomposition plot, we just use the ever-amazing statsmodels to do the heavy lifting for us.\par
\par
plt.rc('figure',figsize=(12,8))\par
plt.rc('font',size=15)\par
result = seasonal_decompose(lim_catfish_sales,model='additive')\par
fig = result.plot()\par
STL decomposition\par
This is Catfish sales data from 1996\f1\endash 2000 with an anomaly introduced in Dec-1998\par
If we analyze the deviation of residue and introduce some threshold for it, we\rquote ll get an anomaly detection algorithm. To implement this, we only need the residue data from the decomposition.\par
\par
plt.rc('figure',figsize=(12,6))\par
plt.rc('font',size=15)\par
fig, ax = plt.subplots()\par
x = result.resid.index\par
y = result.resid.values\par
ax.plot_date(x, y, color='black',linestyle='--')\par
ax.annotate('Anomaly', (mdates.date2num(x[35]), y[35]), xytext=(30, 20),\par
          textcoords='offset points', color='red',arrowprops=dict(facecolor='red',arrowstyle='fancy'))\par
fig.autofmt_xdate()\par
plt.show()\par
Residue from STL decomposition\par
Residue from the above STL decomposition\par
Pros\par
\par
It\rquote s simple, robust, it can handle a lot of different situations, and all anomalies can still be intuitively interpreted.\par
\par
Cons\par
\par
The biggest downside of this technique is rigid tweaking options. Apart from the threshold and maybe the confidence interval, there isn\rquote t much you can do about it. For example, you\rquote re tracking users on your website that was closed to the public and then was suddenly opened. In this case, you should track anomalies that occur before and after launch periods separately.\par
\par
Classification and Regression Trees (CART)\par
We can utilize the power and robustness of Decision Trees to identify outliers/anomalies in time series data.\par
\par
First, you can use supervised learning to teach trees to classify anomaly and non-anomaly data points. In order to do that, we\rquote d need to have labeled anomaly data points, which you won\rquote t find often outside of toy datasets.\par
Unsupervised is what you need! We can use the Isolation Forest algorithm to predict whether a certain point is an outlier or not, without the help of any labeled dataset. Let\rquote s see how.\par
The main idea, which is different from other popular outlier detection methods, is that Isolation Forest explicitly identifies anomalies instead of profiling normal data points. Isolation Forest, like any tree ensemble method, is based on decision trees.\par
\par
In other words, Isolation Forest detects anomalies purely based on the fact that anomalies are data points that are few and different. The anomalies isolation is implemented without employing any distance or density measure.\par
\par
When applying an IsolationForest model, we set contamination = outliers_fraction, that is telling the model what proportion of outliers are present in the data. This is a trial/error metric.\par
Fit and predict (data) performs outlier detection on data, and returns 1 for normal, -1 for the anomaly.\par
Finally, we visualize anomalies with the Time Series view.\par
Let\rquote s do it step by step. First, visualize the time series data:\par
\par
plt.rc('figure',figsize=(12,6))\par
plt.rc('font',size=15)\par
catfish_sales.plot()\par
Time series anomalies\par
The same Catfish Sales data but with different (multiple) anomalies introduced\par
Next, we need to set some parameters like the outlier fraction, and train our IsolationForest model. We can utilize the super useful scikit-learn to implement the Isolation Forest algorithm. You can find the complete notebook with code and other stuff here.\par
\par
READ LATER\par
How to track your classifiers, regressors, and k-means clustering results with Neptune-sklearn integration\par
\par
outliers_fraction = float(.01)\par
scaler = StandardScaler()\par
np_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(catfish_sales.values.reshape(-1, 1))\par
data = pd.DataFrame(np_scaled)\par
# train isolation forest\par
model =  IsolationForest(contamination=outliers_fraction)\par
model.fit(data)\par
Lastly, we need to visualize how the prediction was.\par
\par
catfish_sales['anomaly'] = model.predict(data)\par
# visualization\par
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10,6))\par
a = catfish_sales.loc[catfish_sales['anomaly'] == -1, ['Total']] #anomaly\par
ax.plot(catfish_sales.index, catfish_sales['Total'], color='black', label = 'Normal')\par
ax.scatter(a.index,a['Total'], color='red', label = 'Anomaly')\par
plt.legend()\par
plt.show();\par
Anomaly Detection Isolation Forest\par
Anomaly Detection using Isolation Forest algorithm\par
As you can see, the algorithm did a pretty good job in identifying our planted anomalies, but it also labeled a few points at the start as \ldblquote outlier\rdblquote . This is due to two reasons:\par
\par
At the start, the algorithm is pretty naive to be able to comprehend what qualifies as an anomaly. The more data it gets, the more variance it\rquote s able to see, and it adjusts itself.\par
If you see many true negatives, that means your contamination parameter is too high Conversely, if you don\rquote t see the red dots where they should be, the contamination parameter is set too low.\par
Pros\par
\par
The biggest advantage of this technique is you can introduce as many random variables or features as you like to make more sophisticated models.\par
\par
Cons\par
\par
The weakness is that a growing number of features can start to impact your computational performance fairly quickly. In this case, you should select features carefully.\par
\par
Detection using Forecasting\par
Anomaly detection using Forecasting is based on an approach that several points from the past generate a forecast of the next point with the addition of some random variable, which is usually white noise. \par
\par
As you can imagine, forecasted points in the future will generate new points and so on. Its obvious effect on the forecast horizon \endash  the signal gets smoother.\par
\par
The difficult part of using this method is that you should select the number of differences, number of autoregressions, and forecast error coefficients.\par
\par
Each time you work with a new signal, you should build a new forecasting model.\par
\par
Another obstacle is that your signal should be stationary after differencing. In simple words, it means your signal shouldn\rquote t be dependent on time, which is a significant constraint.\par
\par
We can utilize different forecasting methods such as Moving Averages, Autoregressive approach, and ARIMA with its different variants. The procedure for detecting anomalies with ARIMA is:\par
\par
Predict the new point from past datums and find the difference in magnitude with those in the training data.\par
Choose a threshold and identify anomalies based on that difference threshold. That\rquote s it!\par
To test this technique, we\rquote re gonna use a popular module in time series called fbprophet. This module specifically caters to stationarity and seasonality, and can be tuned with some hyper-parameters.\par
\par
Multiple anomailies\par
The same Catfish Sales data but with different (multiple) anomalies introduced\par
We\rquote ll utilize the same data as we did above with the same anomalies. First, let\rquote s import it and make it ready for the environment:\par
\par
from fbprophet import Prophet\par
Now let\rquote s define the forecasting function. An important thing to note here is that fbprophet will add some additional metrics as features, in order to help identify anomalies better. For example, the predicted time series variable (by the model), the upper and lower limit of the target time series variable, and the trend metric.\par
\par
def fit_predict_model(dataframe, interval_width = 0.99, changepoint_range = 0.8):\par
   m = Prophet(daily_seasonality = False, yearly_seasonality = False, weekly_seasonality = False,\par
               seasonality_mode = 'additive',\par
               interval_width = interval_width,\par
               changepoint_range = changepoint_range)\par
   m = m.fit(dataframe)\par
   forecast = m.predict(dataframe)\par
   forecast['fact'] = dataframe['y'].reset_index(drop = True)\par
   return forecast\par
  \par
pred = fit_predict_model(t)\par
We now have to push the pred variable to another function, which will detect anomalies based on a threshold of lower and upper limit in the time series variable.\par
\par
def detect_anomalies(forecast):\par
   forecasted = forecast[['ds','trend', 'yhat', 'yhat_lower', 'yhat_upper', 'fact']].copy()\par
forecasted['anomaly'] = 0\par
   forecasted.loc[forecasted['fact'] > forecasted['yhat_upper'], 'anomaly'] = 1\par
   forecasted.loc[forecasted['fact'] < forecasted['yhat_lower'], 'anomaly'] = -1\par
#anomaly importances\par
   forecasted['importance'] = 0\par
   forecasted.loc[forecasted['anomaly'] ==1, 'importance'] = \\\par
       (forecasted['fact'] - forecasted['yhat_upper'])/forecast['fact']\par
   forecasted.loc[forecasted['anomaly'] ==-1, 'importance'] = \\\par
       (forecasted['yhat_lower'] - forecasted['fact'])/forecast['fact']\par
  \par
   return forecasted\par
pred = detect_anomalies(pred)\par
At last, we just need to plot the above predictions and visualize the anomalies.\par
\par
Anomaly detection\par
Pros\par
\par
This algorithm nicely handles different seasonality parameters like monthly or yearly, and it has native support for all time series metrics. \par
\par
If you look closely, this algorithm can handle edge cases well as compared to the Isolation Forest algorithm.\par
\par
Cons\par
\par
Since this technique is based on forecasting, it will struggle in limited data scenarios. The quality of prediction in limited data will be lower, and so will the accuracy of anomaly detection.\par
\par
Clustering-based anomaly detection\par
So far, we\rquote ve looked at the IsolationForest algorithm as our unsupervised way of anomaly detection. Now, we\rquote ll look into another unsupervised technique: Clustering! \par
\par
The approach is pretty straightforward. Data instances that fall outside of defined clusters could potentially be marked as anomalies. We\rquote re gonna use k-means clustering, because why not!\par
\par
For the sake of visualizations, we\rquote ll use a different dataset that corresponds to a multivariable time series with one or more time-based variables. The dataset will be a subset of the one found here (columns/features are the same).\par
\par
Dataset Description: Data contains information on shopping and purchase as well as information on price competitiveness.\par
\par
Now in order to process k-means, first we need to know the number of clusters we\rquote re gonna be dealing with. The Elbow Method works pretty efficiently for this.\par
\par
The Elbow method is a graph of the number of clusters vs the variance explained/objective/score\par
\par
To implement this, we\rquote ll use scikit-learn\rquote s implementation of K-means.\par
\par
data = df[['price_usd', 'srch_booking_window', 'srch_saturday_night_bool']]\par
n_cluster = range(1, 20)\par
kmeans = [KMeans(n_clusters=i).fit(data) for i in n_cluster]\par
scores = [kmeans[i].score(data) for i in range(len(kmeans))]\par
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10,6))\par
ax.plot(n_cluster, scores)\par
plt.xlabel('Number of Clusters')\par
plt.ylabel('Score')\par
plt.title('Elbow Curve')\par
plt.show();\par
Elbow method\par
From the above elbow curve, we see that the graph levels off after 10 clusters, implying that the addition of more clusters do not explain much more of the variance in our relevant variable; in this case price_usd.\par
\par
We set n_clusters=10, and upon generating the k-means output, use the data to plot the 3D clusters.\par
\par
Anomaly detection k means\par
Now we need to find out the number of components (features) to keep.\par
\par
data = df[['price_usd', 'srch_booking_window', 'srch_saturday_night_bool']]\par
X = data.values\par
X_std = StandardScaler().fit_transform(X)\par
#Calculating Eigenvecors and eigenvalues of Covariance matrix\par
mean_vec = np.mean(X_std, axis=0)\par
cov_mat = np.cov(X_std.T)\par
eig_vals, eig_vecs = np.linalg.eig(cov_mat)\par
# Create a list of (eigenvalue, eigenvector) tuples\par
eig_pairs = [ (np.abs(eig_vals[i]),eig_vecs[:,i]) for i in range(len(eig_vals))]\par
eig_pairs.sort(key = lambda x: x[0], reverse= True)\par
# Calculation of Explained Variance from the eigenvalues\par
tot = sum(eig_vals)\par
var_exp = [(i/tot)*100 for i in sorted(eig_vals, reverse=True)] # Individual explained variance\par
cum_var_exp = np.cumsum(var_exp) # Cumulative explained variance\par
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 5))\par
plt.bar(range(len(var_exp)), var_exp, alpha=0.3, align='center', label='individual explained variance', color = 'y')\par
plt.step(range(len(cum_var_exp)), cum_var_exp, where='mid',label='cumulative explained variance')\par
plt.ylabel('Explained variance ratio')\par
plt.xlabel('Principal components')\par
plt.legend(loc='best')\par
plt.show();\par
Anomaly detection components\par
We see that the first component explains almost 50% of the variance. The second component explains over 30%. However, notice that almost none of the components are really negligible. The first 2 components contain over 80% of the information. So, we will set n_components=2.\par
\par
The underlying assumption in the clustering-based anomaly detection is that if we cluster the data, normal data will belong to clusters while anomalies will not belong to any clusters, or belong to small clusters. \par
\par
We use the following steps to find and visualize anomalies:\par
\par
Calculate the distance between each point and its nearest centroid. The biggest distances are considered anomalies.\par
We use outliers_fraction to provide information to the algorithm about the proportion of the outliers present in our data set, similarly to the IsolationForest algorithm. This is largely a hyperparameter that needs hit/trial or grid-search to be set right \endash  as a starting figure, let\rquote s estimate, outliers_fraction=0.1\par
Calculate number_of_outliers using outliers_fraction.\par
Set the threshold as the minimum distance of these outliers.\par
The anomaly result of anomaly1 contains the above method Cluster (0:normal, 1:anomaly).\par
Visualize anomalies with cluster view.\par
Visualize anomalies with Time Series view.\par
# return Series of distance between each point and its distance with the closest centroid\par
def getDistanceByPoint(data, model):\par
   distance = pd.Series()\par
   for i in range(0,len(data)):\par
       Xa = np.array(data.loc[i])\par
       Xb = model.cluster_centers_[model.labels_[i]-1]\par
       distance.at[i]=np.linalg.norm(Xa-Xb)\par
   return distance\par
outliers_fraction = 0.1\par
# get the distance between each point and its nearest centroid. The biggest distances are considered as anomaly\par
distance = getDistanceByPoint(data, kmeans[9])\par
number_of_outliers = int(outliers_fraction*len(distance))\par
threshold = distance.nlargest(number_of_outliers).min()\par
# anomaly1 contain the anomaly result of the above method Cluster (0:normal, 1:anomaly)\par
df['anomaly1'] = (distance >= threshold).astype(int)\par
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10,6))\par
colors = \{0:'blue', 1:'red'\}\par
ax.scatter(df['principal_feature1'], df['principal_feature2'], c=df["anomaly1"].apply(lambda x: colors[x]))\par
plt.xlabel('principal feature1')\par
plt.ylabel('principal feature2')\par
plt.show();\par
Visualize anomalies\par
Now, in order to see the anomalies against real-world features, we process the dataframe we created in the previous step.\par
\par
df = df.sort_values('date_time')\par
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10,6))\par
a = df.loc[df['anomaly1'] == 1, ['date_time', 'price_usd']] #anomaly\par
ax.plot(pd.to_datetime(df['date_time']), df['price_usd'], color='k',label='Normal')\par
ax.scatter(pd.to_datetime(a['date_time']),a['price_usd'], color='red', label='Anomaly')\par
ax.xaxis_date()\par
plt.xlabel('Date Time')\par
plt.ylabel('price in USD')\par
plt.legend()\par
fig.autofmt_xdate()\par
plt.show()\par
Visualize anomalies dataframe\par
This method is able to encapsulate peaks pretty well, with some misses of course. A part of the issue may be the outlier_fraction hasn\rquote t played around with many values.\par
\par
Pros\par
\par
The biggest advantage of this technique is similar to other unsupervised techniques, which is that you can introduce as many random variables or features as you like to make more sophisticated models.\par
\par
Cons\par
\par
The weakness is that a growing number of features can start to impact your computational performance fairly quickly. In addition to this, there are more hyper-parameters to tune and get right, so there\rquote s always a chance of high model variance in performance.\par
\par
Autoencoders\par
Can\rquote t talk about data techniques without Deep Learning! So, let\rquote s discuss Anomaly detection using Autoencoders.\par
\par
Autoencoders are an unsupervised technique that recreates the input data while extracting its features through different dimensions. So, in other words, if we use the Latent Representation of data from Autoencoders, it corresponds to dimensionality reduction.\par
\par
Anomaly detection autoencoders\par
Source\par
Why do we apply dimensionality reduction to find outliers?\par
Don\rquote t we lose some information, including the outliers, if we reduce the dimensionality? The answer is that once the main patterns are identified, the outliers are revealed. Many distance-based techniques (e.g. KNNs) suffer the curse of dimensionality when they compute distances of every data point in the full feature space. High dimensionality has to be reduced. \par
\par
Interestingly, during the process of dimensionality reduction outliers are identified. We can say outlier detection is a by-product of dimension reduction.\par
\par
Autoencoders are an unsupervised approach to find anomalies.\par
\par
Why autoencoders?\par
There are many useful tools, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), for detecting outliers. Why do we need autoencoders? The reason is that PCA uses linear algebra to transform. In contrast, autoencoder techniques can perform non-linear transformations with their non-linear activation function and multiple layers. It\rquote s more efficient to train several layers with an autoencoder, rather than training one huge transformation with PCA. The autoencoder techniques thus show their merits when the data problems are complex and non-linear in nature.\par
\par
Build the model\par
We can implement Autoencoders with popular frameworks like Tensorflow or Pytorch, but \endash  for the sake of simplicity \endash  we\rquote re gonna use a python module called PyOD, which builds autoencoders internally using few inputs from the user.\par
\par
CHECK LATER\par
How to keep track of model training metadata with Neptune-PyTorch integration or Neptune-TensorFlow integration\par
\par
For the data part, let\rquote s use the utility function generate_data() of PyOD to generate 25 variables, 500 observations, and ten percent outliers.\par
\par
import numpy as np\par
import pandas as pd\par
from pyod.models.auto_encoder import AutoEncoder\par
from pyod.utils.data import generate_data\par
contamination = 0.1  # percentage of outliers\par
n_train = 500  # number of training points\par
n_test = 500  # number of testing points\par
n_features = 25 # Number of features\par
X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test = generate_data(\par
   n_train=n_train, n_test=n_test,\par
   n_features= n_features,\par
   contamination=contamination,random_state=1234)\par
X_train = pd.DataFrame(X_train)\par
X_test = pd.DataFrame(X_test)\par
When you do unsupervised learning, it\rquote s always a safe step to standardize the predictors like below:\par
\par
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler\par
X_train = StandardScaler().fit_transform(X_train)\par
X_train = pd.DataFrame(X_train)\par
X_test = StandardScaler().fit_transform(X_test)\par
X_test = pd.DataFrame(X_test)\par
In order to get a good sense of what the data looks like, let\rquote s use PCA to reduce it to two dimensions, and plot accordingly.\par
\par
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA\par
pca = PCA(2)\par
x_pca = pca.fit_transform(X_train)\par
x_pca = pd.DataFrame(x_pca)\par
x_pca.columns=['PC1','PC2']\par
cdict = \{0: 'red', 1: 'blue'\}\par
# Plot\par
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt\par
plt.scatter(X_train[0], X_train[1], c=y_train, alpha=1)\par
plt.title('Scatter plot')\par
plt.xlabel('x')\par
plt.ylabel('y')\par
plt.show()\par
Anomaly detection scatter plot\par
The black points clustered together are the typical observations, and the yellow points are the outliers.\par
\par
Model specification\par
[25, 2, 2, 25]. The input layer and the output layer have 25 neurons each. There are two hidden layers, each has two neurons.\par
Step 1\u8202?\emdash\u8202?Build your model\par
\par
clf = AutoEncoder(hidden_neurons =[25, 2, 2, 25])\par
clf.fit(X_train)\par
Step 2\u8202?\emdash\u8202?Determine the cut point\par
\par
Let\rquote s apply the trained model Clf to predict the anomaly score for each observation in the test data. How do we define an outlier? An outlier is a point that\rquote s distant from other points, so the outlier score is defined by distance. The PyOD function .decision_function() calculates the distance, or the anomaly score, for each data point.\par
\par
# Get the outlier scores for the train data\par
y_train_scores = clf.decision_scores_\par
# Predict the anomaly scores\par
y_test_scores = clf.decision_function(X_test)  # outlier scores\par
y_test_scores = pd.Series(y_test_scores)\par
# Plot it!\par
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt\par
plt.hist(y_test_scores, bins='auto') \par
plt.title("Histogram for Model Clf1 Anomaly Scores")\par
plt.show()\par
If we use a histogram to count the frequency by the anomaly score, we will see the high scores corresponds to a low frequency\u8202?\emdash\u8202?evidence of outliers. We choose 4.0 to be the cut point and those >=4.0 to be outliers.\par
\par
Anomaly detection histogram\par
Step 3\u8202?\emdash\u8202?Get the summary statistics by cluster\par
\par
Let\rquote s assign those observations with less than 4.0 anomaly scores to Cluster 0, and to Cluster 1 for those above 4.0. Also, let\rquote s calculate the summary statistics by cluster using .groupby() . This model has identified 50 outliers (not shown).\par
\par
df_test = X_test.copy()\par
df_test['score'] = y_test_scores\par
df_test['cluster'] = np.where(df_test['score']<4, 0, 1)\par
df_test['cluster'].value_counts()\par
df_test.groupby('cluster').mean()\par
The following output shows the mean variable values in each cluster. The values of Cluster \lquote 1\rquote  (the abnormal cluster) are quite different from those of Cluster \lquote 0\rquote  (the normal cluster). The \ldblquote score\rdblquote  values show the average distance of those observations to others. A high \ldblquote score\rdblquote  means that observation is far away from the norm.\par
\par
Anomaly detection cluster\par
This way, we can distinguish and label pretty perfectly between typical datums and anomalies.\par
\par
Pros\par
\par
Autoencoders can handle high-dimensional data with ease. \par
Pertaining to its nonlinearity behavior, it can find complex patterns within high-dimensional datasets.\par
Cons\par
\par
Since it\rquote s a deep learning-based strategy, it will particularly struggle if the data is less.\par
Computation costs will skyrocket if the depth of the network increases and while dealing with big data.\par
So far we\rquote ve seen how to detect and identify anomalies. But the real question arises after finding them. Now what? What do we do about it?\par
\par
Let\rquote s discuss some of the pointers you could apply in your scenario.\par
\par
How to deal with the anomalies?\par
After detection, there comes a big question of what to do about the stuff we identified. There are numerous ways to deal with the newly found information. I\rquote ll list some of them based on my experience to give you a headway on how to approach this question.\par
\par
Understanding the business case\par
Anomalies almost always provide new information and perspective to your problems. Stock prices going up suddenly? There has to be a reason for this like we saw with Gamestop, a pandemic could be another. So, understanding the reasons behind the spike can help you solve the problem in an efficient manner.\par
\par
Understanding the business use case can also help you identify the problem better. For instance, you might be working on some sort of fraud detection which means your primary goal is indeed understanding the outliers in the data.\par
\par
If none of this is your concern, you can move to remove or smoothen out the outlier.\par
\par
Statistical methods to adjust outliers\par
Statistical methods let you adjust the value of your outlier to match the original distribution. Let\rquote s see one of the methods that use mean to smoothen out the anomalies.\par
\par
Using mean to smoothen out the outlier\par
The idea is to smoothen out the anomaly by using data from the previous DateTime. E.g., to even out a sudden usage of electricity due to an event that happened in your house, you could take an average of usages in the same month for previous years.\par
\par
Let\rquote s implement the same to get a clear picture. We\rquote ll employ the same catfish sales data we did earlier. We can adjust with the mean using the script below.\par
\par
adjusted_data = lim_catfish_sales.copy()\par
adjusted_data.loc[curr_anomaly] = december_data[(december_data.index != curr_anomaly) & (december_data.index < test_data.index[0])].mean()\par
Plotting the adjusted data and the old data will look something like this:\par
\par
plt.figure(figsize=(10,4))\par
plt.plot(lim_catfish_sales, color='firebrick', alpha=0.4)\par
plt.plot(adjusted_data)\par
plt.title('Catfish Sales in 1000s of Pounds', fontsize=20)\par
plt.ylabel('Sales', fontsize=16)\par
for year in range(start_date.year,end_date.year):\par
   plt.axvline(pd.to_datetime(str(year)+'-01-01'), color='k', linestyle='--', alpha=0.2)\par
plt.axvline(curr_anomaly, color='k', alpha=0.7)\par
Anomaly detection plotting\par
This way, you can proceed to apply forecasting or analysis without worrying much about skewness in your results. \par
\par
There are numerous methods to deal with non-time series data but unfortunately cannot be used directly in Timeseries due to the difference in underlying structures. Non-time series methods of dealing involve a lot of distribution-based methods which can\rquote t be simply translated to Timeseries data. If you wish to look at some of those, you can head over here. \par
\par
Removing the Outlier\par
The last option if none of the above two sparks any debate in your solution is to get rid of the anomalies. This is not recommended (as you\rquote re basically getting rid of some potentially valuable information) unless it\rquote s absolutely necessary and it doesn\rquote t harm the analysis in the future.\par
\par
You can use the .drop() feature in pandas after identification. It will do the heavy lifting for you.\par
\par
You\rquote ve reached the end!\par
Congratulations! You now know about Anomalies, how to detect them, and what you can do about them. Few endnotes:\par
\par
Time series data varies a lot depending on the business case, so it\rquote s better to experiment and find out what works instead of just applying what you find. Experience can do wonders!\par
There are tons of techniques for anomaly detection apart from what we\rquote ve discussed on this blog. I encourage you to read more in research papers.\par
You can find the complete notebook with code and some bonus stuff here!\par
\par
That\rquote s it for now, stay tuned for more! Adios!\par
\par
Note: images are created by the author unless stated otherwise.\par
\par
\par
Aayush Bajaj\par
Data Scientist at NatWest Group\f0\par
}
 